University of Wollongong  
 
Edge -Based Federated Learning for Bandwidth -
Efficient Wildlife and Bushfire Monitoring in Remote 
Australian Environments  
 
 
Research Proposal — Master of Research (IT / Computer 
Science)  
 
 
Candidate:  Shubho Chowdhury  
Intended Degree:  Master of Research  
Discipline / Area:  Artificial Intelligence, Edge Computing, 
Federated Learning  
Proposed Supervisors:  (To be confirmed)  
Date:  January  202 6

Table of Contents  
 
1. Introduction / Background  
2. Research Questions  
2.1 Primary Research Question  
2.2 Secondary Research Questions  
3. Purpose and Aims  
3.1 Overall Purpose  
3.2 Specific Aims  
4. Significance  
5. Literature Review  
5.1 Wildlife Monitoring  
5.2 Bushfire Detection  
5.3 Federated Learning Algorithms  
5.4 Edge AI and Communication Constraints  
6. Methodology  
6.1 Architecture  
6.2 Simulation  
6.3 Algorithm Evaluation  
6.4 Edge Hardware Testing  
6.5 Ethical and Compliance Considerations  
7. Timeline  
8. Expected Outcomes  
9. Conclusion  
10. References

Introduction/Background  
Australia's unique biodiversity boasts 80% of its mammals and 90% of its reptiles as 
endemic, but many species are increasingly endangered by habitat loss, invasive predators, 
and extreme bushfire events. The infamous 2019 -2020 “Black Summer” bushfires kil led or 
displaced an estimated three billion animals (WWF Australia, 2020). One outcome of this 
tragedy is a heightened awareness of the need for effective, real -time environmental 
monitoring of Australia's extensive remote regions. Current approaches are i nadequate: 
wildlife surveys have a low frequency and are labor -intensive while remote camera traps 
generate extensive image data with around 90% being trigger images without the target 
wildlife (Bruce et al., 2025). Sending high -resolution images from the outback via satellite is 
prohibitively expensive (in the order of hundreds of dollars per gigabyte) while physically 
retrieving data (e.g. memory card swapping) introduces delays of weeks. These limitations 
on data processing capability prevent timely reac tions to invasive predators, endangered 
species decline or ignitions of new bushfires.  
Bushfire monitoring in remote areas relies on public detection or sporadic satellite image 
capture so small ignitions go undetected until they grow large. Thus, real -time monitoring in 
remote Australia is lacking and represents a critical detection gap. Ex isting systems of 
detection warning are in need of fundamental redesign to facilitate real -time monitoring that 
is bandwidth efficient even when operating with low connectivity. Edge computing and 
federated learning provides an ideal basis for a solution ( Miller et al., 2025). Based on this 
background, the research question guiding this project proposes a hierarchical, edge -based 
federated learning solution for accurate, low -bandwidth wildlife monitoring and bushfire 
detection in remote Australian regions . 
Research Questions  
Primary Research Question:  How can a top -down, edge -based, federated learning 
architecture be designed to provide accurate wildlife and bushfire detection for bandwidth -
limited, privacy -preserving, remote Australian environments?  
Secondary Research Questions:  
• How effectively can a hierarchical aggregation scheme and non -IID–aware FL 
algorithms (e.g. FedProx) mitigate model divergence caused by heterogeneous 
ecological data?  
• What trade -offs exist between detection accuracy, energy consumption, and 
thermal stability when deploying lightweight computer vision models on edge 
hardware?  
• To what extent can a hierarchical FL approach reduce satellite data transmission 
costs compared to a centralized model?

• How can the federated learning system design align with the CARE Principles for 
Indigenous Data Governance?  
Purpose & Aims  
The proposed research seeks to create, develop and test a decentralised intelligent remote 
monitoring system for environmental observation. The system will decentralise passive 
remote sensors and turn them into intelligent agents that operate independently  and in the 
peer -to-peer network to collaboratively improve their models for real -time wildlife (e.g. 
identifying a wallaby instead of a feral cat) and early bushfire detection, without human 
intervention, data being sent, or raw data uploads. By using on -device federated learning, it 
would minimize communication expenses without significantly decreasing detection 
accuracy for wildlife and bushfire events of interest . Such need directly addresses 
Australia's need for remote sensing systems that can detect wildlife threats quickly and 
provide early bushfire alerts in an area where connectivity is often poor or non -existent . 
Specific Aims:  
• Design  a hierarchical federated learning architecture combining edge devices, 
regional gateway aggregators, and a cloud coordinator.  
• Optimize  lightweight computer vision models (e.g. YOLO variants) for on -device 
inference and federated training.  
• Evaluate  bandwidth usage, model accuracy, and energy efficiency through a 
simulation -based “digital twin” of remote deployments.  
• Ensure  ethical data governance by keeping raw ecological data local (aligning with 
Indigenous data sovereignty principles).  
Significance  
Proposed edge -based FL will also better minimize response times to biodiversity and fire 
threats than current systems. Where (human) data collection weeks later reveals a problem, 
field camera traps can alert park managers to invasive predators or small fi res before they've 
had a chance to spread. Moreover, such information can prevent biodiversity losses and 
small, smoldering efforts from becoming raging infernos. This is possible because FL 
minimizes the need for proactive, constant monitoring over large,  remote spans. Thus, this 
project, in particular, supports national conservation efforts, such as Australia's Threatened 
Species Action Plan 2022 -2032 . 
Technically, it overcomes longstanding remote monitoring challenges of connection and 
cost. For image data to be sent to satellites to be processed is expensive and currently 
applicable to only small -scale camera networks. Federated learning requires less 
communication, as it sends only model updates instead of raw data, which saves in 
bandwidth usage and preserves detection capabilities. This means camera networks can be 
solar or battery powered - low-energy requirements - where Green AI taught low -carbon

computing allows massive sensor networks to be privacy -preserving and achievable with 
efficient practices.  
Finally, strategically, everyone is connected for AI training but the data does not leave the 
camera to which it is sent and processed, meaning existing environmental data networks 
(TERN, Atlas of Living Australia) can compile data without central database  weaknesses. 
Utilizing CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance means that Indigenous data 
sovereignty is respected, limiting privacy violations  (Carroll, S. et al. , 2020 ). Therefore, this 
study validates a feasible solution to ethical scaling with federated edge computing AI for 
both federated edge computing and conservation in difficult field settings.  
 
Literature Review  
Wildlife Monitoring:  Camera trap investigations across Australia create massive image 
libraries, but due to the fact that up to ~90% of images are null (false trigger) data, sifting 
through the desired research data becomes cumbersome (Bruce et al., 2025). Deep learning 
has tr ansformed automated species identification to the level of human efficacy —if not 
better—but most applications involve cloud -based processing. This does not align with 
researchers operating in remote regions with low bandwidth (Mulero -Pázmány et al., 2025). 
Thus, this article investigates whether there are any methods to resolve the issues of onsite 
identification and null data filtration instead of sending null images to the cloud for 
processing.  
Bushfire Detection:  The same issue arises for bushfire detection. Ground sensors are not 
highly sensitive enough to detect small ignitions far away in country or rural areas, forests. 
The most recent application of IoT sensor networks with federated learning for decentralized  
fire detection networks suggests that decentralized awareness options will help with 
timeliness of detection (Abdul Salam et al., 2025). Yet much of the literature suggests 
wildfires or wildlife independently and under connected, low f requency opportunities. This 
paper builds off the literature by simultaneously detecting wildlife and fire in one federated 
system as the approach taken to federated learning in the literature review only connects 
for different levels of data collection by  means of low -bandwidth, and was tailored for 
specific situations.  
Federated Learning Algorithms:  However, typical FL algorithms are not reliable in the face 
of non -IID client data and communication limitations. For instance, sensor data across 
regions are often extremely heterogeneous which is causative for client drift and reduced 
convergence speed ( Xia et al., 2021; Jimenez et al., 2024). For instance, FedProx  uses a term 
of regularization to better fit data differences and a series of methods of update 
compression (sparse gradients or quantized gradient transmission) a re applied to reduce 
the amount of communication needed. Thus, we will build off of these findings through the 
use of a hierarchical FL system and algorithms that are otherwise stable under non -IID 
conditions to stabilize models in spite of real -world disc repancies.

Edge AI and Communication Constraints:  With edge AI developments, small -sized vision 
models with low -latency performance run even on low -power processors. For instance, 
YOLO -Nano is an object detector usable for fast inference in embedded devices with decent 
performance accuracy (Wong et al., 2 019). However, little is known about the performance 
of such models within a federated learning system for complicated classes in the field with 
real -world constraints. Furthermore, remote sensors operate using long -distance wireless 
connections (LoRaWAN, for example) that have extremely low data rates, meaning extreme 
bandwidth preservation is needed. For example, previous work establishes that a 
hierarchical FL framework using intermediate aggregation entities (regio nal gateways) 
assists in significantly lowering the backhaul communication volume. These results are part 
of the justification for our system architecture, which fuses multiple levels of model 
aggregations and aggressive communication compression to suit l ow-bandwidth scenarios.  
 
Methodology  
Architecture:  We will implement a hierarchical federated learning  framework on edge 
devices for data generation, gateway aggregators for an intermediary (but still localized 
approach) and a cloud coordinator. This decentralized framework stems from theoretical 
explanations behind federated learning to alleviate communic ation limitations and non -IID 
data complications. Empirical system performance will be assessed via FL conventional 
metrics of success: model accuracy, speed of convergence, and communication overhead. 
In addition, the CARE Principles support an ethically sound system since the onset is that, 
due to the nature of the information, raw data will not leave the localized device. Therefore, 
this system supports high privacy requirements and IDC regulations.  
 
Simulation:  The research will mainly be evaluated through simulation with the Flower FL 
framework. A simulated "digital twin"  of the sensor network will mirror the many virtual edge 
clients and federated learning experience. We will simulate the existing datasets (ex. wildlife 
images) into realistic, non -IID distributions by splitting datasets (Dirichlet -based splits will 
skew d ata amongst clients). The simulated network will be modified to accommodate the 
situations of the LoRaWAN connectivity —compromised bandwidth, increased latency —so 
that we can uniformly assess performance under differently heterogeneous data, variable 
numbers of nodes, and compromised network integrity.  
 
Algorithm Evaluation:  We will implement and evaluate federated learning methods: the 
baseline FedAvg algorithm, FedProx (to ensure better convergence in non -IID scenarios) and 
a federated hierarchical FL with intermediate aggregation at the gateway nodes. We will also 
implement  communication -efficient approaches, like gradient compression or update 
sparsification to reduce the required bandwidth. We will evaluate model performance of

each method based on accuracy, stability of training convergence and a data sent to assess 
the cost of accuracy versus efficiency.  
Edge Hardware Testing:  In order to  test the system performance in realistic, operating 
conditions, we will deploy trained models on real edge hardware representative of the field 
devices (e.g. Raspberry Pi 5; NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano) and measure inference latency, 
power consumption, and te mperature management for extended, uninterrupted use on 
such devices. These findings will highlight constraints of the hardware (overheating, 
excessive draw of voltages, etc.) and inform us of necessary changes to the model in order 
for the solution to be feasible in a solar, off -grid powered setting.  
Ethical & Compliance:  The nature of the project is that all unprocessed sensor data 
remains on the local devices so no privacy concerns exist and Indigenous data sovereignty 
is upheld (no sensitive ecological data will ever leave the local device to go to a general, 
centralized  server). Therefore, the very nature of our approach facilitates ethical data 
governance with standards like the CARE Principles. In addition, no wildlife or human 
intervention is planned as we will be using existing datasets for trai ning and simulations —
any future implementation in the field will apply for prior ethical approval.  
Timeline  
 
Figure:  Gantt chart of the two -year research in accordance with the Master by Research 
arrangement.  
The project is split into 4 terms with a vacation break at the end of term 2. The first term is 
dedicated to the literature review, refinement of research questions, preparation of the 
dataset and construction of the hierarchical federated learning archite cture; the second 
term is dedicated to federated learning framework construction for initial experiments and 
baseline experiments; the vacation break acts to minimize experiments related to the

research and allows for light reading, documentation and reconsideration of the project's 
scope. The project resumes in the third term with adjustment of performance tuning based 
on the algorithm, non -IID performance and system evaluation. Finally, the fou rth term is 
dedicated to final experiments, thesis writing, article writing, revisions and submission . 
Expected Outcomes  
By the conclusion of this project, we expect to deliver the following outcomes:  
• An empirically validated hierarchical federated learning framework  for low -
bandwidth wildlife and bushfire monitoring because of  a series of 
prototypes/simulations.  
• Qualitative findings (experimental results) that statistically reduce transmission 
and energy expenditure  relative to a centralized equivalent with statistical 
significance . 
• Real -world implications for AI deployed ethically and data -sovereign  in ecological 
monitoring (i.e. proposed solutions are privacy -preserving and compliant with 
Indigenous data rights).  
• Completed Master's thesis  on the topic and at least one other peer -reviewed 
publication of findings.  
Conclusion  
This project proposes a realistic and ethical federated learning solution for wildlife and 
bushfire remote sensing. As edge intelligence with an ethical stance toward data privacy, 
this research will contribute a practical system for low -connectivity envir onments and 
valuable results to the fields of conservation and federated learning literature.

References  
Abdul Salam, M., Badr, E., & Elbohoty, A., 2025. Mayfly -based federated learning approach 
for early detection of fire . International Journal of Data Science and Analytics , 20(8): 
7167–7187.  
 
Bruce, T. et al. , 2025. Large -scale and long -term wildlife research and monitoring using 
camera traps: a continental synthesis . Biological Reviews , 100(2): 530 –555.  
 
Carroll, S. et al. , 2020. The CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance . Data 
Science Journal , 19: 43.  
 
Jimenez G., D.M. et al. , 2024. Non -IID Data in Federated Learning: A Systematic Review 
with Taxonomy, Metrics, Methods, Frameworks and Future Directions . arXiv preprint , 
2024.  
 
Miller, T. et al. , 2025. Federated Learning for Environmental Monitoring: A Review of 
Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions . Sensors (MDPI) . 
 
Mulero -Pázmány, M. et al. , 2025. Addressing significant challenges for animal detection in 
camera trap images: a novel deep learning -based approach . Scientific Reports , 15(1): 
16191.  
 
Wong, A. et al. , 2019. YOLO Nano: a highly compact “You Only Look Once” convolutional 
neural network for object detection . In Proc. 5th Workshop on Energy Efficient Machine 
Learning (NeurIPS 2019) , pp. 22–25. IEEE.  
 
WWF Australia, 2020. After the catastrophe: Report on wildlife losses from the 2019 –2020 
bushfires . WWF Australia Report . 
 
Xia, Q. et al. , 2021. A survey of federated learning for edge computing: Research problems 
and solutions . High -Confidence Computing , 1(1): 100008.